.TH YAPPR 1 "2026-05-20" "yappr 0.1.0" "yappr Manual"
.SH NAME
yappr \- local push-to-talk voice dictation for macOS Apple Silicon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yappr
[\fIsubcommand\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B yappr
is a low-latency, fully on-device push-to-talk dictation tool for macOS Apple Silicon.
Hold a hotkey (default: Ctrl+Option+Y via Hammerspoon), speak, and release.
Cleaned text streams to your cursor character by character.
.PP
Audio is captured by a long-running Swift daemon
.RB ( YapprSttDaemon )
using AVAudioEngine and transcribed in-process by Nemotron 0.6B via FluidAudio.
The verbatim transcript is cleaned by Qwen3-1.7B-4bit on a local MLX inference server.
No audio or text leaves the machine.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B dictate
Record speech and type cleaned text at the cursor (default subcommand).
.TP
.B daemon \fI<start|stop|restart|status|logs|tail>\fR
Manage the YapprSttDaemon lifecycle.
.TP
.B server \fI<start|stop|restart|status|logs|tail>\fR
Manage the MLX inference server lifecycle.
.TP
.B config \fI<list|active|use|show|diff|delete|path>\fR
Manage configuration presets stored in \fI~/.config/yappr/configs/\fR.
.TP
.B stats
Show dictation metrics: words transcribed, latency, daily usage.
.TP
.B trace
Render the timing trace from the last dictation session.
.TP
.B doctor
Run 11 post-install health checks. Exits 1 if any check fails.
.TP
.B help
Show full help text. Use \fB\-h\fR for a compact one-screen summary.
.TP
.B version
Print the version string and exit 0.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B YAPPR_ROOT
Override the repo/source root (auto-detected from the binary location).
.TP
.B YAPPR_CONFIG_HOME
User config directory. Default: \fI~/.config/yappr\fR.
.TP
.B YAPPR_STATE_HOME
State directory for logs and metrics. Default: \fI~/.local/state/yappr\fR.
.TP
.B YAPPR_DATA_HOME
Data directory for build artifacts. Default: \fI~/.local/share/yappr\fR.
.TP
.B YAPPR_RUNTIME_DIR
Runtime directory for the Unix socket and PID file. Default: \fI/tmp/yappr-$(id -u)\fR.
.TP
.B YAPPR_QUIET
Set to \fB1\fR to suppress stderr output (Hammerspoon automation mode).
.TP
.B YAPPR_COPY
Set to \fB1\fR to also copy cleaned text to the macOS clipboard.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/yappr/configs/active.json
Active configuration preset (symlink to a named config).
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/yappr/logs/
Dictation and daemon logs.
.TP
.I /tmp/yappr-<uid>/stt.sock
Unix domain socket for communicating with YapprSttDaemon.
.TP
.I ~/Library/LaunchAgents/com.yappr.daemon.plist
launchd plist for daemon auto-start at login.
.SH SEE ALSO
Full documentation: \fIhttps://github.com/matteociccozzi/yappr/tree/main/docs\fR
.PP
\fBhammerspoon\fR(1), \fBswift\fR(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Matteo Ciccozzi <matteociccozzi@icloud.com>
